After the previous module toured you into the realms of circulation and distribution, this  module will now introduce you to a very important inhabitant of the art world: you. If you recall, the  production and circulation of art underscore its communicative aspect. Anchored on David Berlo’s  SMCR communication model (Sender-Message-Channel-Receiver), this module will guide you in  investigating the processes involved in how the artist’s (sender) intent (message) that finds its way  (channel) to an audience (receiver) who then finally interprets the artwork in an attempt to decode  the artist’s original intent are realized and thus, received. For two weeks, we will explore your  position in the art world as we are to focus on you as a receiver engaging in communication,  reception, and meaning-making in the dynamic world of the arts. 
As we experience the world through our body and our brain, we learn that we perceive things  differently. What may be pleasant to us is detestable to others. What is common is that we all have  access to our senses because of our shared neurobiology. 
It is said that as human beings, we are prone to a number of visual, auditory, and even tactile  illusions (Gallace and Spence, 2014). These illusions are utilized for the purposes of art making. The 
19th century French painter George Seurat for instance used what was known about the science of  colours and how humans perceive colours in order to create an engaging sensory experience through  his use of pointillism in his paintings (Phaidon, 2017; Munger, 2009). 
In the following activity, you will learn about a set of cognitive processes related to how we  perceive the world which influences the reception (as well as having influenced the construction) of  many works of art and design: the Gestalt (form and shape) principles of perceptual organization. 
The Gestalt theory tackles how we view visual elements. Our minds are pre-determined to  perceive shapes in a particular way. In Gestalt theory, the focus is on how the human eye and brain  receive shapes when shapes are either grouped or not. Gestalt gives the following laws: 
Law of Similarity. It states that the human eye makes relationships  between similar elements; 
Law of proximity. It says that elements closer to each other are perceived  to be related, as opposed to elements which are separated from one  
another. This law is seen in our use of whitespace, such as the paragraph  
spacing in a book. 
Law of Continuation. The human eye tends to favor designs that show a  continuous flow of visual elements instead of separated objects. This  
means the human eye follows lines, curves and sequence of shapes. 
Law of Closure. Our perception prefers complete shapes and has a  tendency to fill in missing visual information to perceive a complete  
shape. 
Figure Law. It examines how the eye separates shapes into a design from  the background of that design. 
Pragnanz Law. It states that our eyes have the ability to simplify complex  shapes. 
Law of Common Fate. It says that when objects point in the same  direction, we see them as a related group. 
How we perceive the world is not only exclusive to the neurological or the biological. Culture  and society also shape how we perceive the world. Though it has been argued that perception is a  construct, there are cognitive processes which are difficult to modify once they have been wired in  our brains and encoded in our bodies. The theory of mirror neurons for instance suggests that when  we observe a familiar human movement performed with intent and purpose, our neuromuscular  system is weakly activated to respond in such a way that we mirror that movement of the person we  are witnessing. The theory implies that the reason why we enjoy watching a dance is partly because  areas of our brain and our body are fired up as if we were dancing too.
As you read about the Gestalt principles, consider whether they could apply to other sensory  modalities such as hearing, touch, taste, or smell. Think about the impact the perceptual principles  like these have on how we experience works of art.
To Stuart Hall, the communication model is not as linear as it purports it to be, but rather  follows a structure which is subjected to several factors. Mass communication is also not  scientific/empirical as it claims to be, but rather ideological. 
The usual communication model is the Aristotelian sender--message--receiver. The model  implies that the sender produces the message, creates/fixes its meaning and the said message is  communicated to the audience directly. According to Hall, communication is not as straightforward  as what Aristotle’s model presents it to be. The audience, he argues, are not mere receivers but  generators of meaning. 
Hall also believes that messages are not as transparent. The nature of communication  (whether it be thru television or some other media) positions it in a particular sign system. It belongs  to the realm of language and thus adheres to particular codes. Built into that given system is the  tendency for the distortion of the production of the message (encoding) and its reception by the  audience (decoding). 
It is in the processes of encoding and decoding, that we become involved in the systems of  discourse. Ultimately, Hall is not concerned with language per se but with how language and the  process of sending messages in the media become political. In his own model of communication, Hall  replaces “sender” with “producer” and “receiver” with “consumer” thereby implying that the  
audience has an active role instead of a passive one. Unlike in the original model, Hall also shows that  meaning does not just reside in the moment of production nor is it guaranteed by any moment in  the process of communication. 
Furthermore, the process of encoding is never neutral. It takes place within a particular sign  system. Take for example the news we watch. The news that we see on TV is not the actual event it  is reporting about but a story or narrative already created and altered by the system that governs TV  reportage. It involves the air of formality (in voice and dress) and professionalism that TV reporters  must exude so that the news would appear objective. What is delivered to us then are events  transformed and mediated by the rules of news coverage. 
Hall believes that the process of decoding involves the idea that the consumer may receive  in various ways the signs planted by the producer. The consumer may make various meanings which  are different from the message originally sent by the producer. Hall’s consumer therefore, is also a  producer since s/he creates meaning. He is not saying that in the process of decoding, anyone can  mean what they want to mean, but rather that various possible meanings are produced. 
The various meanings include: 1) dominant meanings (the meanings generated which reflect  the dominant cultural order of a particular society and the acceptance of televisual codes legitimized  by the encoding process. 2) The negotiated meaning (accepts the dominant view but opens/ allows  itself to potentially oppose the dominant codes. 3) Oppositional meaning (sees the dominant codes  but opposes them). 
This module focused on presenting the various factors involved in the reception of art. It  started with introducing the role biology plays in our perception and its eventual influence on how  we react to visual stimulus. We learned that our aesthetic judgments are partly biologically  determined and, since the workings of the human mind continue to be unfathomable, it is something that we do not fully control. We also learned that other factors that shape reception are intellectual  in nature. Stuart Hall wrote of the different types of reading that an audience performs on any given  text. These theories proved that there is no singular way of perceiving and receiving art. As  individuals, we are shaped by our cultural, economic, and social background. These various factors,  in turn, shape how we respond as a receiver and thus, meaning-maker of art. 
We have previously learned how art production is inextricable from the contexts which  facilitate these creations, debunking the notion of “Art for art’s sake” or the idea that an artwork  exists in a vacuum. In this module, we will further discuss how systems of circulation reiterate the  ideological and economic underpinnings of art production and how both production and  circulation are remarkably interlinked in most instances. 
Other than discussing the influence of institutions, and eventually the art market, in  assigning the value of an artwork or in determining whether an object is art or not, this module  will explore various examples of works that further complicate the roles of institutions in both the  production and circulation of works. We will also discuss works that critique these dominant  systems perpetuating these modes of circulation, as well as independent movements in visual  arts, literature, and film that cater to works outside the established systems. 

The mystique associated with art fades when we consider how it is passed, through many  channels, from artist to audience. Often, the driving force behind this mobility is capital. When  audiences experience art as a commodity, the veneer of prestige, or “artistry,” or “popularity”  momentarily makes us forget about the price tag attached to reading a novel, watching a play, or  subscribing to a music-streaming platform. A work of art — whether it is a painting, a neo-ethnic  ballet, or a Tagalog hip-hop track — belongs to a culture industry that is inextricable from the  market that creates and sustains it. 
We pay the museum entrance fee to view a painting or sculpture. We save up money for  tickets to hear our favorite artists live. The retail value of a paperback, a movie premier, or a  subscription to music streaming platforms purportedly sustains the industry that enables the  production of artistic works. In many cases, it is not only the artist’s labor that produces art as a  finished product ready to be distributed to different audiences. For large-scale productions such  as film and theatre, an assembly of technicians, crew members, and staff collaborate with artists  and their patrons to create work that can be marketed, or at least reach as many people as  possible. In order for this to happen, the artwork must flow through a distribution chain, which  involves publicists, theater owners, media outlets, 
A writer of fiction or poetry also participates in a publishing industry in order to sustain  his or her trade. In the Philippines, writing is not known for being a lucrative profession. Only a  few succeed commercially, and those who do, particularly writers using new platforms such as  the Wattpad, are dismissed, often by critics and academics, merely as popular fare (Angeles,  2004). Writers who wish to make a living of their literary opus must submit their work to literary  journals or magazines to gain some traction with readers and editors; win awards to earn status;  attend high ranking universities that offer degrees in creative writing; and get a literary agent who  will submit their manuscripts to a publisher who, in turn, will print copies of the book and sell  them in bookstores. Writers who rely on earning from writing will have to produce in the genre  that usually sells more: romance, horror, science fiction, detective novels, and thrillers. 
In the visual arts, young artists who wish to get their work distributed must first get an  expensive art education, where their initial interaction with more established artists is made.  Apart from gaining a different perspective in making art, which a master of fine arts degree  supposedly offers, young artists also learn how to tread the industry that involves agents, gallery  owners, art patrons, critics, museum curators, and many others who have their own place in the  art market. 
Thus, in order to establish a comprehensive understanding of art works as cultural  artifacts, and as products of its time and place and economy, students will have to be acquainted  with the art industry. The visual art market of the West can be viewed as an example of a  prevailing system that influences art markets in other parts of the world.
The problem of distribution has continually beset the Philippine movie industry. Cable  television, corrupt business practices, and heavy taxation have been cited as culprits (Tiongson,  2010). Few producers are willing to go beyond the formulas and take the risk of producing  exceptional films that are not only formally innovative but also relevant to Philippine society. Big  budget Western-made films dominate the cinemas inside shopping malls owned by some of the  wealthiest families in the country. Movies that perform well in the box-office are anchored by  celebrities known for their commercial appeal. Moreover, media corporations, concerned mainly  with profit, produce these movies.
Meanwhile, the recurring problem of dearth of quality local films is falsely attributed to  the low-income class who are thought to patronize only commercial films, and therefore,  producers give them only the kind of movies they want. In fact, the production and circulation of  films are controlled by corporations who are in a position to dictate the flow of the market. 
Recent developments in technology and institutional support have changed the course of  film distribution in the Philippines. The introduction of the digital video camera, which costs  significantly less than film cameras, has democratized the way cinema is made. Filmmakers no  longer need to work under commercial studios. Instead, they receive support from government  and international grants. Thus was born the Philippine Independent New Wave, composed of a  group of young filmmakers who have brought some variety to local cinema. 
However, independent films that contribute significantly to the education of an audience  weaned on commercial fare often find limited distribution in film festivals and special screenings.  When an independent movie manages to have screenings at shopping malls, they are removed  after only a few days. Movies such as General Luna and Kita Kita are among the welcome  exemptions that seem to signal a shift in the taste of audiences. 
Thus, in keeping Philippine movies vital and relevant, it is important to reflect on the issues  surrounding film distribution, the significance of an independent cinema, and the continuing  patronage and growth of the Filipino audience. 
Though independent films have flourished in the last fifteen or so years, signaling a  revitalized Philippine Cinema in the age of digital technology, challenges remain in the way films  are patronized by a larger swath of the moviegoing population, and in the way these so-called  independent films depict realities that the more commercial and profit-driven moviemaking has  supposedly neglected. A film may be considered “independent” for how it has eschewed the  corporations and studios but may not truly be independent, i.e. emancipatory, in its form and substance. 
After gaining insight into the system that governs the local film industry and using your  own ideas as an audience and potential filmmaker, you can begin conceptualizing a film project  that you feel addresses the challenges facing filmmaking in the Philippines.
Institutions and venues responsible for the circulation of art are often seen as vanguards  of tradition that sustain the ecosystem of contemporary art. However, the same institutions are  also criticized by writers wary of a patronage system, or by writers working outside the capital  and major cities, for cultivating elitist and backward practices (Cruz, 2017). 
In the publishing industry, prestigious magazines and journals are accused of favoring a  particular aesthetic that tend to marginalize other voices and affect the range of artistic  production. This hegemony extends to award-giving institutions that always selects from the  same pool of judges who give out prizes to younger writers they had mentored (Stuart Santiago,  2012). 
Writers who are endorsed by university presses and creative writing programs in UST,  Ateneo de Manila, UP, and Silliman University do not enjoy a wide readership. One concern is the  inaccessibility of works written in English that have dominated literary discourse for decades,  mainly because of the American system adopted by Philippine educational institutions. Another  is the economic status of a large percentage of the population. Food, shelter, clothing,  employment — and in the case of conflict and disaster-prone areas, safety — and other basic  needs take greater priority over books, films, and art produced by the academe and art  establishments (Cruz, 2016). 
However, local writers have found alternative ways to introduce their writing to  audiences. Self-publishing is encouraged and simultaneous books and zine bazaars are held across  key cities in the country. The effort is powered by the growing sense of a collective that is hungry  for diversity and quality in the literary market. In these zine fests, attending readers discover new  writers and works not found in mainstream bookstores. The writers and artists behind this  movement believe that the usual institutions have hampered the growth of literary publication.  They launched their own publishing community in the hopes that it could bring about lasting  change in the way literature is circulated in the country.
The influence of West in shaping our notions of art is not accidental but stems from the  convoluted power dynamics perpetuated by institutions throughout history that define the art  scene. Galleries, institutions, and the art market have strong bearings in dictating art productions  and distributions throughout milieus. In the essay “Curatorial Circulations in Southeast Asia”,  Patrick Flores situates art production and circulation in Southeast Asia—how the contemporary  art scenes are defined by our postcolonial histories and socio-political landscapes, along with the  roles of artists, curators, and art historian in re-examining the art systems. 
A more identifiable example in examining art production and circulation will be the  Marcos regime whose undeniable contributions in culture and arts complicate the role and nature  of arts in lieu of the conjugal dictatorship and violent history of the regime. Tablazon further  explores the gray areas of complicity, art productions and circulations, and narratives of nation in  the Marcos era. Suarez and Miranda, on the other hand, discuss more contemporary spaces such  as the Ateneo Art Gallery and Silverlens, the relationship of these galleries and class violence, and  the nature of art circulation in these spaces. 
The module’s focus on various artworks and their contexts allows us to critically analyze  the roles of artists and institutions in affirming or subverting dominant art systems which bolster  art production and circulation as in the works of Garcellano, Meireles, Jocson, Banksy, New,  Zicarelli and Suarez, and David. Notions on appropriation, nation, class, and subject position are  also examined through these examples. 
The obvious gatekeeping of different institutions (e.g. entrance fees in museums; galleries  mostly accessible to elites and established artists; more publishing opportunities to established  writers; film showings and distributions determined by big film industries) leads to independent  movements in visual arts, literature, and film that cater to works outside these established  networks to accommodate artists in the peripheries and to facilitate circulations beyond the usual  audiences of these institutions. Interestingly, these independent movements can further be  analyzed through their tendencies to subscribe to dominant modes of productions and  circulations, as well as the extent of their subversions to these very systems.
We have previously learned that the meaning and value of art can vastly differ depending on  who constructs and authorizes it. Different movements and thinkers also have a say on who or what  we should emphasize when making sense of art. We can either valorize the creator or the work itself,  place importance on the spectator’s personal connection with it, or analyze its formal elements.  Throughout modern history, art has been closely identified with creative geniuses whose works were  valued and studied for their aesthetic merits, often to the disregard of their context. However, the  critical turn of scholarship in the 1960s has since shifted the focus on the socio-economic and  historical foundations of art production. This shift has also highlighted its collective nature and  demystified the notions of the autonomous artist.
This module will emphasize the role of context and milieu in the production of works of art.  You will also learn how ideology contributes to our construction of meaning and worldviews, helping  you to further understand just how grounded aesthetics is as a field of study, and how much of it is  relevant and interrelated with many aspects of our lives. In addition, this module will not only help  you explore, but also interrogate key concepts and perspectives that have shaped our current  understanding of how art is produced. 
The 1960s marked a turning point in the study of art and culture following the rise of radical  new perspectives which highlight the historical and social contexts of art production. This focus on  the materialist bases of art and on its status as a commodity within the social and economic order  directly challenged the formalist and hermetic, or interpretive, conception of art and its claims of  intrinsic aesthetic value, and put to question the autonomy of the artist. 
Prior to the widespread use of materialist analysis, the predominant methods used to read  cultural texts felt restrictive because they often disregarded social milieu, or other contexts that  might have aided in the production of a work of art or literature. Humanists put great focus on the  artist/author, celebrating the great skill they have to create. On the other hand, early twentieth  century formalists distanced the author from their work, suggesting that any literary or artistic object  is self-sufficient, thus can create meaning for itself. For instance, in his essay “The Death of the 
Author” (1967), French literary critic Roland Barthes asserted that considering the author’s biography  and intentions would restrict meaning as the work should be the focus of the reader. These  worldviews on art and literature not only influenced our ways of reading, but they have also  cemented how we treat these respective fields as special and prestigious. To remark an artist as a  genius made them untouchable, and to separate a work from its context alienated it from its responsibility as placeholder of ideas and values that may lead to social transformation. 
In particular, Marxist scholars challenged earlier conceptions of art as a disinterested or  transcendent practice and called attention to its function in the maintenance of the dominant  political and economic order. While Marxism is not necessarily devised as a mode of analysis for art  and literature, we can use its fundamental historical materialist view in reading cultural texts. A  materialist analysis situates works of art and literature in a specific economic and institutional setting,  thus baring the material conditions and structures for their production and reception. 
A basic marker of a materialist analysis involves the identification of two key concepts: base and superstructure. The academic Raymond Williams proposed that productive relations constituting  the economic base determines the superstructure, which forms the social consciousness (ideology,  politics, culture) of a society. The economic base consists of the mode of production (its main  economic system, i.e. feudalism in Medieval Europe, late capitalism in the 21st century), including its  means of production (what is being used to create products, i.e. raw materials, factories), and its  forces of production (human labor). The superstructure, on the other hand, constitutes all systems of  social relations, such as politics and government, religion and morality, law, philosophy, science, art,  and culture. Williams defined the superstructure as “the whole ‘ideology’ of the class: its ‘form of  consciousness’; its constitutive ways of seeing itself in the world” (76). Williams clarified that while  the economic base determined the superstructure, it did not mean that their relationship was linear  or abstract as if they existed separately; they have a complex constitutive relationship, whereas the  base shapes the superstructure at the same time the superstructure maintains and justifies the base. 
The dominant class, who controls the superstructure, also owns the means of production,  therefore having control of the products being created. They have control over the ideologies they  can inject into these products, and they are able to maintain the status quo together with their  position and power. Both in art and literature, style and aesthetics are not only born out of an  artist/author’s whimsy or creativity, or that their role is merely for ornament or entertainment. They  are also molded and politicized by institutions. For example, the Renaissance in Rome saw how the Roman Catholic church commissioned artists to paint or sculpt religious or holy images.
Other examples include politicians paying comic artists for propaganda and advertising  materials. During Martial Law in the Philippines, dictator Ferdinand Marcos and his wife Imelda  Marcos commissioned artist Evan Cosayco to paint the infamous Malakas at Maganda, a portrait  likening them to the characters of the creation myth, suggesting they embodied parentage of  “Bagong Lipunan.” Another example is that of museums that only curate and display works of those  who are already heavily connected to big names and networks. Art then becomes inherently  institutional and even complicit in the commodification of the culture that art is supposed to be a  vehicle for. 
When we view art as a dispensable object—something that we can purchase, trade, or even  dispose if need be—it becomes a commodity. In Marxism, a commodity entails not seeing someone  beyond their labor power. So is the case with art: when it is stripped of its cultural, historical, and societal value and identity, it enters commodification. In de la Paz and Flores’ discussion of art  production in their book Sining at Lipunan, they posit that most of our indigenous art forms such as woven textiles, animist sculptures, and even performative ones such as town fiestas and ethnic  dances are viewed upon as commodities. Because most of us look at these facets of art as products  or a site where transactions happen rather than a cultural and historical experience, art is objectified  and commodified. 
A good example of the commodification of art, as per de la Paz and Flores, is the iconic  jeepney. The jeepney is purported as a cultural symbol of Filipino public transportation: we produce  magnets for tourist souvenirs, print it on shirts or tote bags, and it always appears in promotional  videos about the Philippines’ urban and rural life. However, in looking at it as a cultural icon, we often  forget to factor in its historical development as a remnant of American occupation during World War  II, the substantial failure of the government to provide a functional mass transportation which  resulted in privatized public utility vehicles, and the hundreds of thousands who will be affected by  the recent government-sanctioned move to modernize jeepneys. Rather than look at jeepneys as a  nostalgic object or a cultural icon, we must take into account how the production of jeepneys have  shaped the overall experience of the masses. The examination of art and its production reminds us  not to be passive consumers and observers of art; it invites us to participate in the scrutiny and  criticism of the various institutions that mold the production of art that is later on processed and  shaped for our consumption. 

In the previous section, we discussed that there is more to consider when we look at a work  of art or literature. It is not only a product of a creative process, but is also a material product of its  specific time and context. You also learned, after considering contemporary scholarship or the critical  turn, that there are other factors that affect the production of art, and that these are enclosed within  a determining system.  
The succeeding section focuses on other theories of production, specifically those that call  attention to the artist/author’s part in ideological work. This part in your module will discuss one of  the most prominent scholars who sought to unravel the social and materialist nature of art: French  sociologist Pierre Bourdieu. He traced the mystique and obscurity of art to the artists’ disavowal of  economic interests which are deemed crass and at odds with their desired acclaim or prestige. We  will also look at the demystification of the art world and the process of art production, including the  establishment and subversion of culture. 
How is culture like currency? Do we collect, exchange, or sell our cultural knowledge like  it’s cash? 
The sociologist Pierre Bourdieu was interested in how the organization of culture and the  social world around us could affect our individual view of the world. How we didn't just pick the  culture we liked, but in some ways, culture picked us, made us more or less likely to act in certain  ways.  
For Bourdieu, facts about the world could be measured, collected, and recorded, but  they were also instinctively absorbed by us from a young age. They became subjectified into our  own behavior. He was interested in how these cultural and social phenomena connect us to the  wider world. Our tastes, accents, styles of speaking, mannerisms, and values can be the product  of our social environment and our own minds. He sought the subjective dispositions within which  these structures are actualized. Our preferences in art, literature, or music are in large part at  least determined by our social positions, our family’s exposure to specific cultural artifacts, our  economic possibilities, or the interests of the faculty of the school we attend in. 
In the most obvious sense, an American girl attending high school today is unlikely to  enjoy 16th century Mongolian folk songs, but why is this? Why are our tastes often so uniform, so  predictable. Bourdieu’s answer is cultural capital. He saw that if we are brought up in an  aristocratic family where our friends and teachers will read the Homeric epics then we, too, are  more likely to attach a value to that cultural artifact. If everyone tells us these stories are good 
as a child then we are of course more likely to value them because praise for reading them is a  reward as powerful as any financial reward.  
Economic capital like money can be exchanged for other goods, but so, too, can cultural  capital. When the aristocrat goes to school or university, he's more easily going to be able to  exchange his knowledge of Homer for good relations with teachers and higher grades which  then leads better jobs, but why is it, Bordieu asks, that it's Homer or Shakespeare or Bach or  Rembrandt's that is valued more highly as cultural capital ready to be exchanged for what he  called institutional capital? Grades, tests, qualifications, job experience, references.  
He argued that the line between these works and more distasteful cultural artifacts like  soaps or pop music was largely arbitrary. The tastes of certain social groups are valued more  highly than others because they confer status and exclude those who don't have the technical  language or know how to talk about them properly. This way of talking, of thinking might be  thought of as the rules of the game. If you can apply the rules, then you can become part of the  club. Learning the rules, of course, takes time connections, and money and so many are excluded  from the start. 
Bourdieu argued that cultural capital exists in two forms. It can be embodied in our  understanding and knowledge of the world, what he called our habitus and objectified in cultural  artifacts like books, records, schools, museums, and galleries, etc. Access to this objectified cultural  capital and the time to be able to access it is important if the cultural capital is going to be  embodied in our habitus. 
Imagine going to a gallery. It's free, which is great, but there's only a small plaque on  the wall. You stand in front of this Picasso. You stare at it. You think about it. For it to keep your  attention you have to understand what's going on. In order for any cultural object to justify its  existence, it must be appreciated in some way even if it's just in people's minds. The more  informed you are about it, the more time you can spend appreciating the cultural artifact.  
In the sociological study “The Love of Art,” Bourdieu and his colleagues interviewed  visitors to museums and galleries in France. He writes that, “In addition to visiting and it's patterns,  all visitors behavior, and all their attitudes to works on display, are directly and almost exclusively  related to education, whether measured by qualifications obtained or by length of schooling.”  They find that independence of wealth or class education alone determined how long a visitor  would spend in the museum or gallery. Let's go back to this Picasso.  
Any cultural artifact has a message. A message that can be received and decoded by  a receiver. You might understand the message, you might not. You might understand it in a shallow  way or a complex way or a specific way. The message intended by the artist or otherwise has  lots of components, lots of information, and related information. You might first look at the shading  or color. You might see a metaphor or wider symbolism. You might know or not know something  about the artist, a bit about their lives. You might then know something about the period, the  genre, and the school the artists belong to and why this particular piece is important or  unimportant, influential or uninfluential. You apprehend all of this in the message. You recognized  the code of the message.  
He writes, “Someone who only knows how to divide into Romanesque and Gothic, puts  all Gothic cathedrals, undifferentiated into the same class. whereas someone with greater  competence can discern stylistic differences between the “primitive,” “classical,” and “late”  periods or even recognize the works of specific schools within each of these styles.”  
Bourdieu argues that you can only appreciate the cultural artifact as long as your  attention is drawn to it. and so as soon as you run out of things to think about you move on. The  ability to do this is cultural capital. Again, it can be more readily exchanged at school for  qualifications, or at parties for new friendships or connections, and finally for financial reward 
or status. Some cultural capital is valued more highly than other cultural capital and within any  type some subset of knowledge is valued more highly than another subset. Some of this, of course,  might be justified.  
Learning rocket science or neuroscience has a particular culture to it that is highly valued  and becomes increasingly difficult to understand and learn at higher levels and this is for a very  good reason. And in many ways Homer is justifiably valued, too - Homer is culturally and socially  useful. The Iliad and the Odyssey teaches ethics and morals, philosophy and rhetoric. Knowing  Homer can be useful for society, and so is valued more highly, but it, of course, is subjective, and  it's when this knowledge is cut off from certain groups and classes that a problem arises.  
Culture can be made exclusive and inaccessible, and this often is reducible to economics.  You need the time and money to learn or purchase entry by books. Bourdieu asks, “Is it surprising  that the tastes and the good taste of more cultivated individuals derive from the homogeneous  and homogenizing, routinized and routinizing action of the academic institution? And when all is  said and done are highly Orthodox.” And that's as Boaz noted, the thought of what we call the  educated classes is controlled essentially by those ideals, which have been transmitted to us by  past generations.  
In other words, institutions and elites guard their cultural knowledge in some way, and  sometimes this is justified and sometimes it's not. Take music in its most aesthetic form. That is,  stripped of any moral message, of social gold: an instrumental hip-hop beat or an orchestra  playing a simple melody. What reason is there here to privilege one over the other? What makes  Beethoven more respectable than LL Cool J? 
The field of cultural capital across society values certain types of cultural knowledge  higher than other types of cultural knowledge. This evaluation is often purely arbitrary, having  the effect of making sure “you're one of us” as we've seen. In academia, for example, a certain  style of writing using certain language signals that you know the rules of the game. It's not so  much what you know, but the style of how you transmit it. In interviews, a certain accent is judged  often subconsciously very quickly. If you're at a party and a circle is talking about Wagner the  ability to partake in the conversation is more likely to get you accepted by that group, but these  dominant values can also be subverted. In other words, underprivileged groups don't always  have to learn the rules of the dominant game, but can create new rules, a new game, a new type  of cultural capital. 
Take hip-hop. It's commonly argued that hip-hop arose out of four main elements: DJing,  MCing, breakdancing, and graffiti. In other words, music, dance, and fine arts. In one article,  ethnomusicologist Adam de Paor-Evans points out that graffiti grew out of a number of other  elements including urban destitution and a strong but subordinated diaspora culture. This group  is unlikely to be able to afford to go to the Opera or have the time to sit and read Homer. There  is an alternative though: create new cultural capital. The common struggle and the shared strength  of subordinated groups, the infusion of different cultural heritages, the uniqueness of their  environments all mean that each member of the group can recognize a shared and distinct culture.  
Social groups then discuss them, find meaning in them, review the merits of each piece  of graffiti or each DJ set, having the effect of building their own cultural discourse in their own  unique social surroundings. De Paor-Evans writes that knowledge sources in hip hop are wide ranging and multifarious and are located in the processes and productions of hip-hop practices  such as lyrics, rhythm, and scratch sonics, graffiti pieces and lettering styles, as well as the more  ephemeral dance moves, speech and body language of b-boying.  
New cultural forms can also borrow from existing forms to legitimize them. De Paor Evans notes how Michelangelo was often cited by early hip-hop artists like Rahim and LL Cool J.  Mally Mall’s lyrics include: ‘Cause each and every time you touch a spray paint can /  Michelangelo's soul controls your hands. In other words, new art forms arising from unique cultural 
and social contexts become both objectified and the artists, musicians, and dancers and  objectified in graffiti tags, events, and vinyl all being created from new circumstances and  borrowing from other’s cultural capital.  
This becomes powerful. Users value this capital because it says something about the  environment socially and politically, and when a group homogenizes in this way the cultural  capital becomes valued by others outside of the group. As for example, the music spreads. In the  UK, Grime has slowly been entering the mainstream with storms. He recently playing the headline  spot at Glastonbury Festival originating as a fringe expression of inner city culture, Grime has  started to play a major role in national politics with hashtags like “Grime for Corbin” trending  and a huge spike in registrations to votes after a number of artists simultaneously encouraged  their followers to do so. And now the cultural capital of Grime is more likely to be exchanged  into a political and social capital. In other words, the common purpose of the group is more likely  to be accepted by wider society. The seriousness of the art form is more likely to be accepted  by the stuffy music professor, more likely to be exchanged into qualifications.  
Bourdieu’s thoughts has a range of consequences and can be interpreted and applied  in many ways. For me, at its core, it suggests at least two things: first, equality of access. It's not  enough that museums and galleries are free. Education is widely funded and gigs are affordable.  If you go to the National Gallery in London and the plaques are tiny. It's hard to learn anything.  You need to be able to learn what that culture means, understand its wider context, be able to  access the information required to decode the message easily. And second, the culture of  economically disadvantaged groups is important, powerful, and should be emphasized,  platformed, and engaged with by wider society.  
Cultural capital, embodied as it is over lifetimes and generations, is often more powerful  than economic capital and in many ways, Bourdieu is simply expanding on the 500-year-old  adage that knowledge is power.

In “The Production of Belief” (1980), Bourdieu claimed that, contrary to the lack of recognition  of art as a lucrative business enterprise and at the disavowal of its commercial interests, the nature  of art as a business could be seen with how the agents of the field function to put value on works of  art as cultural products. Bourdieu called these agents cultural businessmen, whose aims were to  publicize and market works of art and literature. They were intermediaries such as editors and  publishers, theatre managers, gallery curators and art dealers, and critics. Cultural businessmen not  only mediate the consumption of these cultural products, but also how they should be perceived and  valued. Therefore, the production of art does not simply mean the creative transformation of raw  materials and ideas into a tangible product by an artist; it also entails the networking of cultural  businessmen who not only monetize them (economic capital), but also profit off the accumulation of  cultural capital (social and non-material assets one can exchange for social relations and mobility, i.e.  education and knowledge). Artists, as Bourdieu asserted, are also self-interested by seeking to be a  part of what he called a ‘circle of belief’, where they trust the tradition of being mediated by art  traders and critics, and of whose connections they valued greatly. Bourdieu also referred to these  mediators as ‘symbolic bankers’ because they proclaimed the value of the work of art they  ‘discovered’ and invested their own prestige in the potentials of these artists they found ‘interesting’  and lucrative.
Our tastes and preferences are molded by such mediations. The values we put into works of  art and literature are all constructed and greatly influenced by our habitus, or our embodied personal  and social dispositions. The video “Cultural Capital, the Love of Art & Hip Hop” illustrated Bourdieu’s  concepts best by likening how cultural capital, hand-in-hand with economic capital, are used as ‘rules  of the game’, wherein if one does not have the money, power or status, education or refined skills,  then they cannot be ‘a part of the club’. Likewise, the art world is greatly structured by following  these rules, so that the status quo is kept intact, and the circle remains exclusive. Any work of art or  literature that must be marketed should be trusted and made sacred by the art trader, and as  Bourdieu wrote, those who are a part of the dominant class “operate essentially defensive strategies,  designed to perpetuate the status quo by maintaining themselves and the principles on which their  dominance is based” (269). The Then & Now video also points out that not all cultural capital is on  equal footing; some are valued more than others.  
If you have ever wondered why we are required to read Shakespeare’s works in our Literature  classes, why we do not intellectualize pop music, or why we hold realist paintings to be the standard,  then these are manifestations of tastemakers gatekeeping what counts as valuable art. They  authorize works as canon and make sure the same aesthetic standards are still highly regarded. For  instance, in our own art education in the country, our metric for artistic and literary brilliance comes  from our importation of the Western canon. We have been conditioned that the standards we know  are the only ones in place, despite our society and experiences being vastly different from the  Western or White experience, and our communities having their own set of aesthetics. As you’ve  learned in Module 1, Alice Guillermo, in her preface to Art and Society, challenged to demystify art  studies, specifically in colonized countries like the Philippines. She wrote that if we wished “to break  away from the domination of the globalizing Western aesthetic tradition,” we need to recognize the  numerous standards and practices of aesthetics that exist outside of that system. 
2.2. Authorship, Alienation, and Subversion 
The art world maintains its posturing by keeping its system and the traditions and principles  they govern by intact. How the dominant class goes about it is through a perpetuation of ideologies.  These ideologies not only center on the general system of art production, but also on how we  collectively view authorship, and how we challenge this system. 
Before the influence of materialist analysis as led by Marxist scholars, art and literary critics  were bent on focusing on the text for meaning, thus appropriately proclaiming the ‘death’ of the  author. If for the formalists, the author was a mere scribe who needed to be separated from their  work, opposing thinkers asserted otherwise. While it was deemed fallacious to use the author and  their intentions as a crutch to uncover a text’s meaning, materialist analysis still sought to consider  the role an author played in the creation of ideology. French theorist Michel Foucualt defined the  author by its function (aptly used the term author-function), and pointed out that authorship can be  used in discursive practices. He posited that authorship could mean ownership, that putting a name 
to an object also meant it is their property and they are legally bound to them. If the work of art or  literature was something negative (e.g. blasphemous, challenging authority), then its creator could  be punished or censored. At the same time, Foucault stated that authorship could be made collective  of an era, whereas an individual creator’s name was not important to the grand prestige of a specific  literary or scientific age. However, he will also make us realize that as times and values change  through history, so does our way of valorizing bodies of knowledge and worldviews. Authorship, even  without holding it divine as the Romantics did, is consecrated, or made sacred, in order to authorize  it. We mark a sculpture or a novel’s significance because of the name attached to it either because it  represents its era, or if the association of name to work has been made essential. 
Bourdieu asked, “who is the true producer of the value of the work—the painter or the dealer,  the writer or the publisher, the playwright or the theatre manager?” (263). If we take into account  only the manufacture of the material object, which is the painting, sculpture, or manuscript, then its  commercial value should only equate to the cost of its production. However, as Bourdieu first  reasoned out, we are paying for more than that. The value of a work goes beyond the raw materials  and the labor of the artist as it takes into account everything else in between. That includes the  ideologies embedded in it and the defense and mediation of its value. With this upheld, the  artists/authors become alienated from their work. We can see alienation either through how the  profit from the object goes to the capitalist and not to the laborer, or when workers are alienated  from themselves. So to have cultural businessmen weigh in on an artist/author’s economic self interest immediately alienates them from their own work. 
Whichever function an author plays in our understanding of art, it goes back to the same  point that Foucault made: authorship is defined and constructed not just through the authenticity of  an identified creator, but more so from projections of how texts are created both materially and  ideologically. As we uncover more about the system of art production, we start to stray away from  old ideas of authorship. Artists and authors are greatly involved not only in the creation of art and  literature, but also in embedding specific values that can be received by readers.  
So, if the dominant class strategizes to keep authority and capital safeguarded, what does it  truly mean to subvert the system and own the production of art and literature? Bourdieu warned us  that aesthetic revolutions tend to be partial or insincere because artists/authors and their circles will  only subvert certain principles, and not necessarily the system as a whole. We see this in how art  movements react against those that came before them through profane or scandalous aesthetic  exhibitions but will in turn become celebrated and consecrated by the very same mediators. These  ‘subversive’ displays are often made into acts or events of art, turning them into something  performative, and then being produced by the art world as the ‘next big thing’. 
These ideas are also reflected in Raymond Williams’ essay “Dominant, Residual, and  Emergent.” He discusses the creation of culture and its interrelatedness through ideologies that  uphold it. There are three kinds of ideologies: dominant, residual, and emergent. You are already  familiar with the first one, dominant, which is the most influential and is shaped by whoever controls 
the means of production. The second one, residual, is defined by Williams as something that “has  been effectively formed in the past, but it is still active in the cultural process” (122). Williams noted  religious values and visions of rural life as examples of residual cultural elements. They may no longer  be the standard when it comes to visual arts themes, but they are still relevant and familiar enough  to be produced by artists. The last one, emergent, is considered to be the new, often reactionary or  challenging type of ideology. Its role is to interrogate the concepts and values of the dominant  ideology. Examples of these include counterhegemonic subcultures in music, such as punk in the  1970s, feminist punk or riot grrrl in the early 1990s; in dance, we have voguing in the underground  ballroom scene pioneered by the Black and Latino LGBTQ community from the 1960s to the 1990s;  in literature, we have do-it-yourself zines and independent publishing.  
Dominant culture has a great tendency to co-opt the subversiveness of emergent ideology.  Williams referred to it as hegemony’s way of incorporating these emergent styles in order to quell  the threat they might pose. Big record companies have reproduced punk styles and dressed them up  as a form of marketable anarchism; voguing has been pushed into the mainstream when it inspired  the song Vogue, which subsequently pushed Madonna as the face and icon of the dance style while  ball culture itself dwindled in popularity in the 1990s.
Bourdieu wrote that the strategy to beat the dominant class is to “return to the sources”  (269), to go back to where art or literature is first produced and commence from there. Used as an  example by Then & Now, hip hop thrives not only as a music genre, but also as a holistic cultural  experience (fashion, visual arts, dance, etc.), because it operates outside the ‘rules of the game’ set  by the dominant class. The Black and Latino communities that fostered it did not embody the same  habitus as those in high class society. Subordinated groups had to find a way to express their shared  experience and culture through other means, and that can entail the production of their own cultural  products without the mediation and ‘trust’ of cultural businessmen, thus creating their own cultural  capital, and coming up with their own standards of legitimizing their works.  
So many subcultures flourish around spaces held down by dominant cultures. They thrive in  knowing they can produce their own art and exchange both creative and cultural practices. However,  with the demands of a capitalist market, and with economic capital a driving force to help artists and  writers continue to produce their works, it becomes increasingly difficult to compete with the system,  which is why emergent cultures tend to die naturally or easily be incorporated into hegemonic  institutions. 
Now that you have learned about the basis of art production and the institutions surrounding  the art world, let us now take a look at how mechanical and digital reproduction changed the  landscape of art production and the institutions around it. Have you ever wondered how paintings  displayed in exclusive museums end up in t-shirts or socks? How about expensive designer clothing  having copies or what they call counterfeits or bootlegs in low-end markets for much cheaper prices?  This is what we will tackle in this part of our module. 
It is said that the more art or the art world in itself is gatekept from the public, the higher the  chances that it will be mass produced in some other way. Why so? Because art had possessed a  certain form of mystification, or bringing certain cultural objects and their meaning farther away from  the public by heightening and therefore obscuring its value, we had regarded art as a form of divine 
object or practice. However, according to Berger, the invention of the camera altered the way we  perceive and produce art (17). The invention of the camera cemented the idea that art is man-made.  Through the camera and its power to replicate images, art pieces that have been elusive to the public  eye can now be reproduced. As technology advanced further and cameras evolved to recording  motion pictures rather than just still images, it gave way to film production which, in today’s world,  is a more accessible art form to many than going to exclusive museums and expensive theater  productions. Can you think of other art forms that used to be exclusive but now has further and wider  reach because of technological advancements that aided in their reproduction?  
The art world and its obscure cultural capital has always been insistent on the extraordinary  value of the “original.” Experiencing a painting, a sculpture, a live theater production, if only according  to tastemakers, can only be done in a singular manner: to be there and look at it up close—only then  can we experience its “aura.” According to Walter Benjamin, a philosopher Berger referenced, “aura”  is the sublime effect of art which can only be experienced through its presence (4). The closer we are  to an original work of art, the greater the aura that we experience. Benjamin also emphasized that  aura cannot be replicated. Do you think you have experienced aura? Would you be able to recall  where and how that experience occurred? When a mechanical or digital reproduction of art is made,  the aura is distorted. The copy of the original cannot be a vessel for its mystified value. However,  despite the divine assumption of an original work of art, Berger reminds us that bringing the  experience of art to a wider audience and consequently bridging them to their own culture is a more  critical function of institutions (33). What do you think is more important in experiencing art:  preserving the aura or allowing art to reach a wider audience?
Might you recall a moment in your life where you wanted to go to a museum, watch a live  concert, or buy an expensive and original item but couldn’t? Alternative modes of production is the  
usual response to the exclusivity of art. Because art forms and the art world itself are gatekept from  public consumption, the public finds a way to reproduce art through various mechanical and digital  tools. Counterfeit culture is a stellar example of the mechanical reproduction of art. Because high end brands are not accessible to many, bootleg and counterfeit products take on a strong market for  producing copies that are more affordable and generally presentable than the original ones.  Consequently, artworks like Mona Lisa and Starry Night have now become wearable items in the form  of t-shirts, bags, and socks. This only shows that people will participate in the creation and practice  of art if they are given the means to access it. Alice Guillermo emphasizes that while art may be a  social construct and that art is inherently value-laden, it is integral to building a nationalist identity  and therefore, art should be available to everyone who wants to participate in its meaning-making,  production, and consumption. What are other means of reproducing art to make it more available to  other people? Have you participated or perhaps purchased similar types of reproduction?  
As consumers of art and literature, we usually only look at the object that is presented to us,  and most of the time we end up regarding art as something “divine” because it is how it was taught  to us by older modes of disciplines. Because we have been trained to analyze a painting or a poem  by pointing out an author’s intention or paying close attention to the formal techniques used in  creating the work, we tend to overlook all the other things that lend itself to its creation. In this  module, we took our understanding of art and our evaluation of it to include context and milieu, citing  the economic and ideological systems that underpin the production of art. You also learned that to  uncover these systems, you have to look at an author’s complicity and interest in putting value on  their work, together with mediators and institutions that would dictate their own interests in making  works of art and literature sacred for consumption. Through this module, we are reminded that art  is man-made; therefore, it is not free of the creator’s biases, motives, and politics. 
To emphasize that the production of art is institutionalized means to acknowledge not only  its material base as a product, but also it being used as a vessel to embed values as controlled by  those with power and capital. You have read and understood the theories of Bourdieu, De la Paz,  Flores, Berger, and Williams, whose main premises are driven by a criticism of capitalism, and how as  a major economic system, it complicates and even dictates our cultural exchanges. Through their  scholarship, we are able to realize just how politicized and normalized our tastes and connections  with art are. Our preferences are not born out of our own choices, but are also products that are  shaped and solidified by these institutions. From visual arts to music, textiles, and pop culture  products, you should be able to see just how encompassing these theories are. 
Furthermore, you have also problematized authenticity of authorship by interrogating the  systems that alienate artists/authors from their craft, and how they seek to subvert existing dominant  cultures and standards to gain control over what they produce. These viewpoints and interrogations 
will be developed further in the next module, which deals with how art is circulated. And lastly, you  have seen more contemporary ways of production, specifically reproduction of images and  experiences through digital technology. More of Berger’s ideas, which he has synthesized from  Walter Benjamin, will be discussed in Module 5, which is on the reception of art. 

Technique is the manner or method by which artists manipulate the aforementioned  materials to further express their feelings and ideas. In Eugene Delacroix’s Portrait of Paganini (1832),  notice how the painter’s rough brushstrokes seem to convey the raw intensity of the musician’s 
performance. Compare how Delacroix’s brushwork affects the subject matter in Horse Frightened by  a Storm (1824). 
Painters do not always apply pigments with a brush or palette knife. In a frottage technique,  artists rub lead or charcoal over a piece placed on a granular surface to obtain textural effects. For a  soft ethereal effect, a spray gun is used. In the decalcomania technique, pigments are applied on two  sheets of paper which are then pressed together to create random shapes. 
In graphic arts such as printmaking, there are four traditional techniques or engraving  processes, namely: relief, intaglio, surface or planographic methods, and serigraphy or silkscreen.  New printmaking processes include collography, plantigraphy, thermography, xeroxography, and  viscosity printing. Printmakers are particular about the medium (paper) and engraving techniques  because these have specific effects and meanings (Guillermo 35-37). 
In architecture, methods or systems of architectural constructions include: lashed  construction, post-and-lintel construction, arch and vault construction, skeleton construction, and  cantilever construction (Guillermo 44-46). 
Elements are the building blocks of the arts while principles serve as guides in organizing these  elements. Lines, shapes, forms, colors, value, space, texture and perspective are elements of the  Visual Arts. Basic elements such as rhythm, melody, harmony, and expressive elements such as  timbre (tone color), dynamics, tempo and lastly form, comprises the backbone of music. The  elements of dance consist of the theme, movement, technique, design, choreography, music, scenery 
and costume and paraphernalia. Literary elements vary with each particular genre (short story,  poetry, essay or novel).

Lines are two points/dots connected that define shapes, space and contours, visually move  in various directions and suggest mass or volume. Lines are either straight or curved. Straight lines  can be vertical, horizontal or diagonal. Consider Piet Mondrian’s Broadway Boogie Woogie (1943)  alongside Bridget Riley’s Dominance Portfolio (1977) then check these against a list of the visual  meanings of lines. 

Forms are three-dimensional shapes with volume and depth. Similar to shape, forms are either  organic/biomorphic or geometric. Organic forms are derived from nature, are visually free flowing or  spontaneous and cannot be measured. On the other hand, geometric forms show precise angles and  edges, can be measured and are often found in architectural designs. These are Cloud Gate (2004)  by Anish Kapoor and Untitled Match (Beatles, Bonifacio) (2014) by Alwin Reamillo.

Colors affect an artwork’s visual emotional impact through the manipulation of hue, intensity,  and value which are dimensions of color. Considered as one of the forms of non-verbal  communication, color stimulates the imagination and generates various responses from the viewers.  Colors can elicit a particular feeling from a viewer. For example, warm colors (red, orange, yellow)  tend to advance and catch attention. Cool colors (blue, purple, green) tend to visually recede within  a visual composition. 

Value refers to lightness or darkness of specific areas in the visual composition of a painting or  a drawing. Value creates the illusion of volume and emphasizes by creating light and depth. See El  Greco’s The Fable (1580-1585) and Vela’s goat skull rendering (2007) for your study of this element.

Space is the area between and around objects or figures in a visual composition. We call the  area occupied by objects positive space. Empty areas are called the negative space. Space can project  a feeling of depth and thus may be two-dimensional or three-dimensional. Importantly too, space  provides the audience a visual reference of understanding the artwork. Let us consider space in Juan  Sajid Imao’s design for the Marawi Heroes Memorial (2018) and JC Mendoza’s The Mind of Kris  Aquino (2014). 

Texture refers to the surface quality of an artwork as seen and/or felt by the viewer. What can  we say about texture in Vela’s Female Figure (2006)? In this detail of Anton del Castillo’s OMG 2  (Chaos) (2019)? 

Perspective creates a three-dimensional illusion (depth, volume and space) on a two dimensional painting, design, drawing or a photograph. Perspective can be achieved by utilizing linear  or aerial perspective. Linear perspective uses lines and a vanishing point in order to show that a visual  object’s size changes with the distance. On the other hand, aerial perspective shows an illusion of  depth influenced by the atmospheric distance between objects in the composition. 
Principles organize elements. In Visual Arts, “principles of composition” are the ways artists  employ, position, and combine the elements to create something aesthetically pleasing or thought provoking. The fundamental principles are Balance, Rhythm, Movement, Proportion, Unity and  Emphasis. 
Balance is the equal distribution of visual weights of each element in a composition. Colors,  shapes, forms, texture and space should be balanced in the design space to make the whole  composition stable. Balance can be formal (symmetrical) , informal (asymmetrical), or radial. Formal  balance is achieved by placing similar elements on each side of the design composition. Informal  balance is achieved by placement of objects in the design area. In radial balance, the elements are  placed accordingly around a central point. 
Rhythm is a visual tempo created when one or more elements of design are used repeatedly to  create a feeling of organized movement. To keep rhythm visually interesting and lively, the use of a  variety of elements is important. Rhythm can be achieved by repetition, gradation, radiation,  opposition and transition. Study rhythm in Andy Warhol’s Campbell’s Soup Cans (1962) and del  Castillo’s Yellow Nation (2016).
Movement gives the artist the control over the arrangements or use of various elements to  create an illusion of action. This in turn creates a path for the viewer’s eye throughout the work of  art, often to focal areas. Where are the focal areas in Batang Makabayan (2009) by Torres? Then  account for movement in Kagampan (1982) by Renato Habulan.  
 Proportion achieves visual unity when objects or figures relate well with each other in terms of  their sizes, color or number in the visual design composition. For example, when drawing the human  figure, proportion can refer to the size of the head compared to the rest of the body. Let us make use  of Vela’s Untitled (2020) and Neil Doloricon’s entry to Manila Today’s Inkwentro: Lockdown (2020)  to study proportion and its significance.
Unity is the achievement of visual harmony or a sense of cohesion between all parts of the work  of art, which creates an overall sense of wholeness or completeness of the artwork. See this principle at work in del Castillo’s Man created God not God created man (2015) and Torres’s Piging (2009). 
Emphasis refers to the use of elements on a focal point that catches the viewer’s  attention. Artist makes one area or a main subject matter stand out by contrasting it with other  areas using colors, value, shape, texture or size. How was emphasis achieved in Paras’s Luna (2019)?  In del Castillo’s The Sleeping Dragon (2015) 
Art movements are distinct styles in art which are shared by artists with common  philosophies, concepts, goals, mediums, and techniques. You will likely notice that the idea of “a 
movement” changes from one movement to another. The thirteen below are condensed  presentations from online sources, mainly Google Arts & Culture and Tate Modern. These are but a  few among the many art movements for us to explore.  

The Renaissance: The 14th to 16th centuries saw a vibrant period of European cultural,  artistic, political and scientific “rebirth” after the Middle Ages. It has been characterized as a  nostalgia for classical antiquity. 
Renaissance art reached its peak in the short period known as the High Renaissance (1500–1530)  in the work of Michelangelo, Leonardo, and Raphael. The Renaissance style then underwent a  myriad of successive transformations in Mannerism, Baroque, Rococo, neoclassicism, and the  Romantic movement. The work of Raphael was held up as the prime model in the art academies  until the mid-nineteenth century. 
Baroque: Reaching its height in Rome, 1630–1680, Baroque is characterized by confidence,  dynamism, and an engaging, realistic approach to depiction. While its direct emotional appeal suited  the spirit of the Catholic Counter-Reformation, the movement became influential across Europe and  went on to engage non-religious themes in portraits, still-lifes, and mythical subjects. In fact, the term  “Baroque” has prospered beyond its origins and has gone on to mean any florid and elaborate style  in art, architecture, music or literature. Take a look at Saturn Devouring His Son (1936) by Flemish  artist Peter Paul Rubens and Deer Hunt (1650/1695) by Dutch artist Abraham Hondius.
Realism: The French novelist Champfleury coined the term in the 1840s. Rejecting “High Art”  and the History paintings of their time, artists of realism took for their subjects scenes of peasant and  working class life, the life of the city streets, cafes and popular entertainments. They conveyed  increasing frankness in the treatment of the body and sexual subjects. The term generally implies  grittiness. Such subject matter combined with the new naturalism of treatment caused shock among  the predominantly upper and middle class audiences for art. These paintings from two French artists  are Gustave Coubert’s The Man Made Mad with Fear (1844) and Jean-François Millet’s The Angelus (1857-1859). 

Impressionism: The impressionists of 1860s France found that they could capture the  momentary and transient effects of sunlight by working quickly, in front of their subjects, in the open  air (en plein air) rather than in a studio. They developed a greater awareness of light and color as  they followed the shifting patterns of nature. Brushwork became rapid, broken into separate dabs to  render the fleeting quality of light. Many critics faulted the resulting paintings for their unfinished,  amateurish appearance.
Notably, it was the Impressionist movement that included a woman, Berthe Morisot, among  its roster of founding members: Monet, Renoir, Degas, and Pissarro. These are Morisot’s The Cradle  (1879) and Laura Muntz Lyall’s The Watcher (1894). 

Post-impressionism: While founders have no agreement on its direction, Post-Impressionism can  be considered a rejection of the impressionist emphasis on the naturalistic depiction of light and  color in favor of abstract qualities or symbolic content. It includes neo-impressionism, pointillism,  symbolism, Cloisonnism, synthetism, and the later work of some impressionists. 

Cubism: Cubists broke down objects and figures into distinct planes to show different viewpoints  simultaneously in one frame. This suggests three-dimensional form and the two-dimensional flatness  of the canvas. This marked a break with European tradition (since the Renaissance) of creating the  illusion of depth from a fixed viewpoint using light, shadow, linear perspective, and other devices.  Our paintings are Linen (1913) by Natalia Goncharova and Still Life with Checked Tablecloth (1915) by  Juan Gris. 

Fauvism: The fauvists were interested in the scientific color theories developed in the 19th  century – particularly those relating to complementary colors that, side-by-side, make each other  look brighter. They used simplified forms, vivid colors (often applied directly from the tube), wild,  loose dabs of paint, and rough, abrupt brushstrokes. French artists who initially comprised the  movement called themselves the Fauves (wild beasts) in response to a comment about their work by  art critic Louis Vauxcelle.

Surrealism: The Surrealists perceived a deep crisis in Western culture and responded with a  revision of values at every level. They were inspired by the psychoanalytical discoveries of Freud and  the political ideology of Marxism. Surrealism aimed to revolutionize human experience, rejecting  rationality and valuing dreams, the unconscious. Unconventional techniques were developed in both  poetry and the visual arts, all of these in service of a quest for the beauty of the uncanny. 
Expressionism: Although partly a reaction to academic art and Impressionism, we can also  understand the movement as a form of “new Humanism” which sought to communicate man’s  spiritual life. Expressionism reflected a deep intellectual unrest regarding the destruction of trust  between man and the world. As a consequence, the rift between subject and representation widens.  Color can be highly intense and non-naturalistic, brushwork typically free, the application of paint  often generous and highly textured. Expressionist art tends to be emotional and sometimes mystical. 
Dadaism: Launched in Zurich in 1916, the movement was shared by independent groups in New  York, Berlin, Paris, and elsewhere. The Dadaists hurled art, poetry, and ideas against the nationalist  and materialist values that had brought about war. Diverse in style, they were united by a rejection  of conventions, seeking through unorthodox techniques, performances, and provocations to shock  society into self-awareness. Here are Baroness Elsa von Freytag-Loringhoven and Morton Schamberg’s God (1917) and Kurt Schwitters’s Heavy Relief (1945). 

Pop Art: Emerging in Britain then in America, Pop Art reached its peak in the 1960s, a continuing  revolt against the dominant approaches to art and culture of that time. Artists felt that what they 
learned at art school and saw in museums did not have anything to do with their lives or the things  they saw around them every day. Instead they turned to sources such as Hollywood movies,  advertising, product packaging, pop music and comic books for their imagery. These are Rosalyn  Drexler’s The Dream (1963) and Sister Mary Corita Kent’s news of the week (1969). 

Constructivism: Here, art directly reflects the modern industrial world. The utopian climate  following the October Revolution of 1917 led artists to seek to create a new visual environment,  embodying the social needs and values of the new Communist order. In their manifesto: “The  material formation of the object is to be substituted for its aesthetic combination. The object is to be  treated as a whole and thus will be of no discernible ‘style’ but simply a product of an industrial order  like a car, an aeroplane and such like. Constructivism is a purely technical mastery and organization  of materials.” Constructivism was suppressed in Russia in the 1920s, but was transmitted to the West.  Here is Lyubov Popova’s set design for Fernand Crommelynk’s play “The Magnanimous Cuckold”  (1922) along with her Production Clothing for Actor no. 5 (1921). 
Post-modernism: Anti-authoritarian by nature, postmodernism rejected the dominance of any  single style or definition of what art should be. As it broke the established rules about style, it  introduced a new era of freedom and a sense that “anything goes”. Postmodernism embraced  complex and often contradictory layers of meaning. Most of all, it reflects a self-awareness of the  style itself. By mixing different artistic and popular styles and media, this art can borrow from or  ironically comment on a range of styles from the past. These are John Cage’s 4’33” (first page of  musical score of Four Minutes and 33 Seconds, 1952) and Yayoi Kusama’s Pumpkin (2018). 

What Is Art?  
Perhaps you have a handmade piece of furniture passed down from gen- eration to  generation. You have always admired it. It is beautiful. But is it a work of art? What about a  lovely bowl you recently encountered at a Japanese restaurant, or, for that matter, the  beautifully presented meal? When you visit museums and art galleries featuring  contemporary works, you might wonder whether some of the items you encounter are  artworks. Or, if you take that for granted you may still be puzzled why many items are  considered art.  
The question, “What is art?” is commonly asked when attempting to find conditions,  necessary or sufficient, that make an item an artwork. That is, the goal is normally to find a  principle for classifying all artworks together while distinguishing them from all nonartworks.  Sometimes the goal is set higher. Some look for a “real” definition in terms of necessary  conditions that are jointly sufficient for being an artwork. We will see later in the chapter that  several promising approaches to answering this question do not meet this more stringent  requirement.  
This project is often identified as trying to “define” something: a property (being art, being an  artwork), a concept (art, artwork), a word (“art,” “artwork”). At the end of the chapter, I will  explore the relation between the classificatory project and the attempt to define the items  just mentioned. In the mean time, I will often call proposals to answer “what is art” questions  “definitions” as a convenient shorthand throughout the chapter.  
Who Cares What Art Is?  
Why are classificatory principles philosophically interesting? Why should we care what art is?  One preeminent reason is the permanently puzzling nature of avant-garde art. From  impressionist paintings to piles of dust and unmade beds recently exhibited in galleries, such  works, in their time, puzzled, and sometimes enraged, critics and viewers. Are these items art  (if they all are) merely because they are put forward by an artist, placed in a setting such as a  gallery, or is there something more to being art that needs to be identified? Can something  be put forward in this way, but fail to be an artwork?  
Avant-garde art of the past one hundred years has made the nature of art increasingly  puzzling because it has progressively stripped works of the tradi- tional traits by which we  recognize them as art, while expanding the category of objects capable of art status. With  regard to new categories, examples are legion. Found art has added unworked objects chosen  by the artist, which are often ordinary artifacts like bottle racks and bicycle wheels. Earth,  bricks, and scraps of cloth are materials of now famous recent works. With regard to the  stripping away of traditional traits, the same is true. In some works—which, in addition to  found art, include aleatoric art where the final product is left to chance—the contribution of the artist is minimized. In some works, form seems to disappear as in lint strewn on a gallery  floor. Many works attempt to eliminate aesthetic properties. Robert Morris issued a notarized  statement withdrawing all aesthetic qualities from a metal construction that bore the poetic  title Litanies. Sometimes this stripping away is pursued because artists themselves have taken  an interest in the nature of art. Hence anyone cognizant of the art world can hardly avoid  the question: what is art?  

Finally, there is an issue concerning choice among art concepts. The fact is that there is not  just one concept of art. Current concept or concepts have a number of historical  predecessors. One of the earliest is is expressed by the ancient Greek word techne, which  refers to any skilled activity and its products. We still sometimes use “art” in this sense, as  when we call cooking and all manner of crafts “art.” We also use “art” in a much narrower  way than the one in which we are interested, where it refers exclusively to the visual arts.  
The concept of fine art that came fully into use in the eighteenth century comes closer to the  concept we are attempting to understand in this chapter. This concept includes the five major  arts: poetry, painting, sculpture, music, and architecture. It is less clear what else it includes  and how it compares to the related but different category of decorative art, which emerged  around the same time. The philosophy of art surely is concerned with fine art, but I am  inclined to think we are working with a broader concept that includes more than what  eighteenth-century thinkers thought of as fine art. This con- cept either gradually evolved  from the eighteenth-century version or possibly predates it. Our concept countenances the  multiplication of art forms, a vast broadening of objects capable of achieving art status, the  stripping away of traits necessary for achieving that status. Not all art is representational. Not  all aspires to beauty or sublimity. Art need not be made only to be contem- plated for its own  sake. The fact that an item serves some useful function does not disqualify it as art in this  broader sense. Further, we no longer think of the artist exclusively as a genius set apart from  normal humanity as the eighteenth century did. We now think in more democratic terms. We  also distinguish less sharply between fine and popular or folk art.  
In addition to these features, which reflect relatively recent development in the art world, our  classificatory practice recognizes as art items from Europe and the Middle East stretching back  at least to the most ancient civilizations, but quite plausibly even further to Paleolithic cave  paintings and artifacts. It also recognizes as art, and in equal measure, items from non Western cultures. (For a contrary view see Shiner 2001.) If we are to affirm that these classes  of items are art in the same sense as are post-eighteenth-century items produced in western  cultures, we must consider two possibilities. One is that the eighteenth-century concept of  fine art is itself flexible enough to cover these items from earlier times and different cultures.  If we take this option, we mustn’t take eighteenth-century characterizations of fine art as the  final word in defining the concept. Rather these characterizations point to a concept that is better defined from a later vantage point, a point supported by the fact that the best way to  characterize fine art has been constantly con- tested from the start. The second option is to  affirm that there is a concept of art of much broader application than the eighteenth-century  conception. It applies to all these items but not to just any artifact produced with skill. People  attracted to this possibility disagree among themselves whether this concept pre- or post dates the eighteenth-century one, but they agree that it applies widely to artifacts created in  the distant past up to the present day (see See S. Davies 2000, Dutton 2000, and Lopes 2007  for a defense of dif- ferent version of this view).  
Historical Background  
Something should be said about the historical roots, not of the concept of art, but of the  attempt by philosophers to define art. It is sometimes supposed that the earliest definitions  of art are to be found in the writings of ancient philosophers such as Plato and Aristotle. In  fact, one won’t find, in these writers, a definition of art, in the sense of an item belonging to  the fine arts or of art in its current sense, if that departs from the concept of the fine arts.  What is true is that they wrote about such things as poetry, painting, music, and architecture,  which came to be classified as fine arts, and saw some com- mon threads among them that  did not apply to other artifacts produced with skill. Plato was very interested in the fact that  poetry, like painting, was a representation or imitation (mimesis) of various objects and  features of the world, including human beings and their actions, and that it had a powerful  effect on the emotions. Aristotle also emphasized the idea of poetry as imita- tion and  characterized other arts, such as music, in those terms.  
This way of thinking of the arts wielded enormous influence in the Renaissance and  Enlightenment, and so when the concept of the fine arts solidified, the first definitions of art  were cast in terms of representation, by such important figures as Hutcheson, Bateaux, and  Kant. It is not necessary to set out the exact content of all of these definitions here, since in  the later period in which we are interested, they were superseded by other approaches. Of  these earlier definitions, Kant’s definition is the one that has had truly lasting influence. Fine  art, according to Kant, is one of two “aesthetic arts,” arts of representation where “the feeling  of pleasure is what is immediately in view.” The end of agreeable art is pleasurable sensation.  The pleasure af- forded by the representations of fine art, in contrast, is “one of reflection,”  which is to say that it arises from the exercise of our imaginative and cogni- tive powers. Fine  art is “a mode of representation which is intrinsically final . . . and has the effect of advancing  the culture of the mental powers in the interest of social communication” (Kant 1952, 165– 66). Elements of this conception survived even after the idea that the essence of art is  representa- tion was abandoned. One is a series of contrasts between (fine) art, properly  understood, and entertainment (agreeable art). Art makes more demands on the intellect but  offers deeper satisfactions. Art is “intrinsically final,” that is, appreciated for its own sake. Art  has some essential connection with communication. 
The struggle to replace the idea that art is representation takes place in the nineteenth  century. This occurs on many fronts, just as did the formation of the concept of the fine arts  a century earlier. Artistic movements such as romanticism, impressionism, and art-for-art’s sake challenge ideals associated with the exclusive concern with representation and direct  attention to other aspects of art, such as the expression of the artist and the experience of  the audience. Debates among critics in response to these movements raise questions about  the boundaries of art. The invention of photography challenges the representational ideal in  painting, at least if that is regarded as the increasingly accurate, lifelike depiction of what we  see. The increasing prestige of purely instrumental music provides at least one clear example  of nonrepresentational art. For some, such music provides a new paradigm captured by  Walter Pater’s claim that all the arts aspire to the condition of music. In response to all this,  new definitions of art appear, especially, ex- pression theories, formalist theories, and  aesthetic theories.  
What all these theories have in common with one another, as with representationalism, is  that they identify a single valuable property or function of art, and assert that it is this  property that qualifies something as art. Such theories dominate the attempt to define art  right through the middle of the twentieth century. Although they now no longer dominate,  they are still regularly put forward. Expression, formalist, and aesthetic theories have been  the most important and influential examples. Each deserves attention in some detail.  
Art as Expression  
The ostensible difference between expression and representation is that while the latter looks  outward and attempts to represent nature, society, and human form and action, the former  looks inward in an attempt to convey moods, emotions, or attitudes. We seem to find  instances of expressive art where representation is de-emphasized or absent. It is very  common to think of instrumental music, or at least many pieces of music, in these terms. As  the visual arts moved toward greater abstraction, they too often seem to de-emphasize, or  abandon, representation for the sake of expression. One can even extend this to literature,  which pursued expressivist goals from the advent of romantic poetry through the invention  of “stream of consciousness” and other techniques to express interiority. So it might seem  that one could find art without representation but not without expression. This might  encourage the thought, independently encouraged by various romantic and expressivist  movements in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries, that even when ex- pression and  representation co-occur, the real business of art is expression.  
Space permits the examination of only one specific proposal to define art in terms of  expression. The definition comes from Collingwood’s Principles of Art (1938). Collingwood  defines art primarily as an activity: that of clarifying an emotion, by which he means  identifying the emotion one is feeling not merely as a general type, such as anger or remorse,  but with as much particularity as possible. Collingwood does not deny that one can rephrase  this definition in terms of a work of art rather than an activity, but he believes the work exists  primarily in the minds of artist and audience, rather than in one of the more usual artistic  media. He seems to think that the job of the medium it to enable the communication of  emotion to the audience who share the same emotions. 
The definition has well-known problems. First, even if expressiveness, in some sense, is a  widespread phenomenon in the arts, it is far too narrowly circumscribed by Collingwood. He  prescribes a certain process by which a work of art must come about, whereas it is in fact a  contingent matter whether works are created in the way he recognizes. Not unexpectedly,  the definition rules out many items normally accepted as artworks, including some of the  greatest in the western tradition, such as the plays of Shakespeare, which by Collingwood’s  standards are entertainment rather than art. The definition assumes that the emotion  expressed in a work is always the artist’s emotion, but it is not at all clear why a work cannot  express, or be expressive of, an emotion not felt by the artist when creating the work. In  recent years, the idea that art expresses an actual person’s emotion has given way to the idea  that art is expressive of emotion in virtue of possessing expressive properties, such as the  property of being sad, joyful, or anxious, however those properties are analyzed. Such  properties can be perceived in the work and their presence in a work does not require any  specific process of creation.  
Formalism  
Developing alongside expression theories of art were formalist theories. If one stops thinking  that art is all about representation, a natural further thought is that what art is all about is  form rather than representational content. This thought gained support from various  developments in the arts during the period of high modernism, a long, exciting period roughly  between 1880 and 1960. Though many art forms contain modernist masterpieces, the work  of painters were the paradigm and inspiration for many of the most influential formalist  theories. Cezanne in particular was the darling of the early formalists, Clive Bell (1914) and  Roger Fry (1956). Cezanne’s paintings contain perfectly traditional representational  subjects—landscape, portraiture, still life—but his innovations could be seen as formal with  virtually no concern to express anything inner other than Cezanne’s eye making features of  visual reality salient. These innovations involved the use of a wide-ranging palette, a handling  of line, and an interest in the three-dimensional geometry of his subjects, which give his  figures a “solidity” not found in his impressionist predecessors, while at the same time  “flattening” the planes of the pictorial surface. Taking such formal features as the raison  d’être for these paintings became the typical formalist strategy for understanding the  increasingly abstract works of twentieth-century modernism, as well as for reconceiving the  history of art. Like the other simple functionalist theories under discussion here, formalism is  not just an attempt to define art. It is a philosophical theory of art in the sense that it also  attempts to identify the value of art, and what needs to be understood in order to appreciate  an artwork.  
A formalist attempt to define art faces several initial tasks. They all have to do with figuring  out how to deploy the notion of form in a definition. One can’t just say art is form or art is  what has form, because everything has form in some sense. Thus, the first task is to identify  a relevant sense of “form” or, in other words, to identify which properties give a work form  in the chosen sense. Second, if objects other than artworks can have form in this same sense,  one has to find something special about the way artworks possess such form.  
The best known and most explicit formalist definition of art belongs to Clive Bell. According  to Bell, art is what has significant form. Significant form is form that imbues what possesses it with a special sort of value that consists in the affect produced in those who perceive it. Bell  calls the affect “the aesthetic emotion” though, as Carol Gould (1994) has pointed out, this is  probably a misnomer since what he has in mind is more likely a positive, pleasurable reaction  to a perceptual experience. Thus, Bell claims that what is special about form in art is that it is  valuable in a special way.  

